.ds D Duplicates
.\" nroff -man duplicates.1
.\" place in (depending on your system):
.\"    /usr/local/man/man1
.\" or /usr/man/man1
.\" or /usr/share/man/man1
.TH DUPLICATES 1
.SH NAME
duplicates \- a tool for detecting duplicate fragments of code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B duplicates
.BI [ options ]
.BI [ files ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\*D is a tool, built as a standalone backend to the Cobra analyzer, that
can efficiently detect duplicate code fragments and patched code sequences
in code archives. It's performance scales linearly with the size of the
code archive being scanned.
.SH OPTIONS
The duplicates tool recognizes all relevant options from the Cobra front-end to
handle the initial tokenization of the code. The back-end code scans the
token sequence prepared in this way, using hashing to locate repeated code
segments. The \--Patches option checks sequences of duplicate code with small
sequences of changes in between to report likely patched code sequences.
.br
Standard Cobra options are preceded by a single dash, like \-F or \-MaxMem, and
all options intended to be interpreted by the back-end are preceded by a
double-dash like \--verbose, or \--help.
.TP
.B \--Detail
Provide additional context for all reported duplicate or patched code sequences.
See also \--ShowOnly.
.TP
.B \--GapLimit=25
Set the maximum length of the number of lexical tokens that can separate
two fragments of duplicated code, in a scan option \--Patches. It has no
effect when used without that option. The default value is 25 tokens.
.TP
.B \--help
Print a brief summary of command-line option recognized by the duplicates tool.
See examples.
.TP
.B \--MinLength=100
Set the minimum number of lexical tokens that must match for a duplicate
code segment to be flagged. The default value is 100. On average there are
5 to 10 lexical tokens per source line of C code.
.TP
.B \--MultiClones=2
Report code fragments that are duplicates N or more times
(0, meaning disabled, by default).
.TP
.B \--Patches
Report likely patched code sequences, which are defined as two exactly
matching code fragments, with a difference (with a maximum length that
can be defined with the \--GapLimit parameter) in between those fragments.
Can be combined with the \--Detail option for more context.
.TP
.B \--ShowOnly=N
Show output with the context details of only the Nth report. By default
N=0 which leaves this option is disabled. See also \--Detail.
.TP
.B \--verbose
Provide more information about progress in a larger scan, and do some
additional checking on the accuracy or reports.
.SH EXAMPLES
Some checks on the Cobra code itself:
.RS
 $ cd Cobra/src_app
 $ duplicates --MinLength=65 *.c
 1 match of 89 tokens cwe_120.c:185-196 <-> cwe_120.c:162-173
 2 match of 69 tokens find_taint_cfg.c:88-96 <-> find_taint.c:760-768
 $ cd ../src
 $ duplicates --MinLength=65 --ShowOnly=2 *.c
 2 match of 69 tokens find_taint_cfg.c:88-96 <-> find_taint.c:760-768
 <find_taint.c:760 ;
 <find_taint.c:761 int cnt = 0 ;
 <find_taint.c:763 do { q = q -> nxt ;
 <find_taint.c:764 } while ( q && strcmp ( q -> typ , "ident" ) != 0 && q -> seq < r -> seq ) ;
 <find_taint.c:766 while ( q && q -> seq < r -> seq && ( s = strchr ( s , '%' ) ) != 0 )
 <find_taint.c:767 { s ++ ;
 <find_taint.c:768 switch ( *
---
 >find_taint_cfg.c:88 ;
 >find_taint_cfg.c:89 int cnt = 0 ;
 >find_taint_cfg.c:91 do { q = q -> nxt ;
 >find_taint_cfg.c:92 } while ( q && strcmp ( q -> typ , "ident" ) != 0 && q -> seq < r -> seq ) ;
 >find_taint_cfg.c:94 while ( q && q -> seq < r -> seq && ( s = strchr ( s , '%' ) ) != 0 )
 >find_taint_cfg.c:95 { s ++ ;
 >find_taint_cfg.c:96 switch ( *
.RE
The help option:
.RS
 $ duplicates --help *.c
.RE
The final \f2*.c\f1 used here avoids the tool from switching
to streaming mode where input is read from the standard input. The
argument is interpreted to be an input file.
.sp
Using single-dash front-end options:
.RS
 $ echo *.c > c_files
 $ duplicates --Patches --GapLimit=100 -F c_files
.RE
Reads the input from a list of files named \f2c_files\f1.
.sp
Setting a memory limit with a front-end option:
.RS
 $ duplicates -MaxMem 45000 --MinLength=100 --Detail *.[ch]
.RE
We use a front-end Cobra option to set the maximum amount of heap
memory that the tool can use while searching for duplicate code fragments
of at least 100 lexical tokens, and allow the tool to print the
context information for each match found.
.sp
Scanning for duplicates used multiple times:
.RS
 $ duplicates --MinLength=200 --MultiClones=10 *.[ch]
.RE
Find code sequence of 100 tokens or more that are duplicated
at least ten times.
.SH AUTHOR
Gerard Holzmann, gholzmann@acm.org
.sp
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcobra\f1, \fBcwe\f1, \fBfind_taint\f1, \fBjson_convert\f1
