.ds J Json_convert
.\" nroff -man json_covert.1
.\" place in (depending on your system):
.\"    /usr/local/man/man1
.\" or /usr/man/man1
.\" or /usr/share/man/man1
.TH JSON_CONVERT 1
.SH NAME
json_convert \- convert Cobra json outputs into JUnit or SARIF format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B json_convert
.BI [ options ]
.BI "\-f file"
.SH DESCRIPTION
\*J reads a JSON formatted file provided as the last argument
and converts it into either JUnit or SARIF format.
If no further options are given, the input is converted into JUnit format.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-V
Print version number and exit.
.TP
.B \-verbose
Currently this merely prints the number of valid records read from
the input on the standard output. Error message are always printed
on the standard error output stream.
.TP
.B \-junit
Generate JUnit format (the default).
.TP
.B \-sarif
Generate SARIF format instead. If multiple format options are given,
the final one will prevail.
.TP
.B \-a
(Added in Version 1.3) Generate the SARIF format in an alternate format that uses rule categories
more efficiently. The first section of the output describes the rules, and
the second section of individual warning records refers to those rules by index.
.TP
.B \-base=pathname
Adds a uriBaseId field to the SARIF output set to pathname, which
can be an absolute pathname to locate the files.
The pathname should contain at least one / and no " characters.
.TP
.BI "\-f file"
The file is assumed to be in JSON format, and must contain fields
named "type," "file," "line," and "message."
Ideally, it also contains fields named "cobra," which will be
present in Cobra generated JSON files. The "cobra" fields contain
additional location information that can be used in the conversions.

.SH EXAMPLES
.br
.in +5
$ cwe -json+ *.c > json.txt
.br
$ find_taint -json+ *.c >> json.txt
.br
$ json_convert -a -sarif -f json.txt > sarif.txt
.br
.in -5

.sp
.SH AUTHOR
Gerard Holzmann, gholzmann@acm.org
.sp
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcwe\f1, \fBcobra\f1, \fBfind_taint\f1. \fBx_make\f1.
.br
